Improving token efficency (#9937)
Microsoft/vscode-docs: blogs/2026/06/17/improving-token-efficiency-in-github-copilot.md

| Time between requests | GPT-5.2 | GPT-5.3-Codex | GPT-5.4 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 10-20 min | +13% | +32% | +10% |
| 20-30 min | +135% | +142% | +137% |
| 30-40 min | +301% | +203% | +679% |
| 40-60 min | +338% | +279% | +919% |

The increase was largest after longer gaps between requests, when cached model state that would otherwise have expired remained available for reuse. In practice, this increase means more of your prompt is processed at the lower cached-input rate, reducing the cost of requests even after longer pauses.

### Tool search

To avoid sending all tool definitions on every request, tool search makes this on-demand. Available to models GPT-5.4 and newer, [OpenAI's native tool search](https://developers.openai.com/api/docs/guides/tools-tool-search) implements this deferral with a `defer_loading` flag.

Upfront, the model only sees lightweight metadata: the name and description of each deferred function or, when deferred functions are grouped into a namespace, only the namespace's name and description.

> During a four-day VS Code experiment with GPT-5.4 and GPT-5.5, tool search reduced total tokens, time to first token, and time to complete:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During a four-day VS Code experiment with GPT-5.4 and GPT-5.5, tool search reduced per-turn token utilization, time to first token, and time to complete:
```

| Metric | Model | Delta |
| --- | --- | --- |
| P50 Total tokens used per turn | GPT-5.4 | -9.81% |
| P50 Total tokens used per turn | GPT-5.5 | -8.61% |
| P50 Time to first token (TTFT) | GPT-5.4 | -6.88% |
| P50 Time to first token (TTFT) | GPT-5.5 | -7.34% |
| P50 Time to complete (TTC) | GPT-5.4 | -5.31% |
| P50 Time to complete (TTC) | GPT-5.5 | -5.42% |

> For the median Copilot user, this means that overall token usage fell by roughly 9% with GPT-5.4 and 11% with GPT-5.5.

Reviewer 2: nit: 
>11% with GPT-5.5.

doesnt align with the table contents:

| P50 Total tokens used per turn | GPT-5.5 | -8.61% |

Reviewer: Good call - the data above is correct, but maybe not as clear as it should be.

Tokens used _per turn_ decreased by ~10% and ~9%, but _overall_ token utilization for a given user was reduced by 8.97% for GPT-5.4 and 10.92% for GPT-5.5. I'll reword this!

> For the median Copilot user, this means that overall token usage fell by roughly 9% with GPT-5.4 and 11% with GPT-5.5.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aggregated across an entire session, total token usage for the median Copilot user decreased by 8.97% with GPT-5.4 and 10.92% with GPT-5.5.
```

June 17, 2026 by [Ryan Caldwell](https://github.com/RyanJamesCaldwell) and [Bhavya U](https://github.com/bhavyaus)

> Have you noticed an agent get slower and more expensive the longer it works on a task? With the recent move to usage-based billing for GitHub Copilot, every token in an agentic session matters. Tokens affect your AI credits, can increase latency, and reduce the effectiveness of the agent's context window for completing a task. The cost difference is real: reusing cached model state can be **up to 10 times cheaper** than recomputing it from scratch on every request.

Author: I actually prefer the previous opening paragraph. Can we revert that paragraph. Sorry :)

From our own data, we've noticed that each new model generation tends to consume more tokens per task than the previous one. As agents take on longer, more autonomous work, inefficiencies quickly result in higher costs and slower responses.

![Chart showing tokens per turn increasing across successive model generations](token-usage-trend.png)

> Making the GitHub Copilot agentic harness more token-efficient is continuous work, and it's the best way to counter this trend. For most changes, we run [A/B experiments in production and offline evaluations](https://code.visualstudio.com/blogs/2026/05/15/agent-harnesses-github-copilot-vscode) against task suites, confirming that task success rate holds or improves while token usage drops. It's rarely one big win, usually a steady stream of small ones. Below, we walk through recent gains, first for OpenAI models and then for Anthropic models.

Author: This one is great!

## How agentic requests spend tokens

Two costs sit at the heart of every agentic request, and two ideas help us reduce them. Both apply across OpenAI and Anthropic models, even though each provider exposes them differently.

<!-- TODO: add images/graphics -->

> **The prompt prefix and caching.** In an agentic coding session, a large share of every request repeats across turns: system instructions, tool definitions, repository context, and conversation history. This repeated beginning is the **prompt prefix**. When requests share the exact same prefix, the inference provider can reuse cached model state instead of recomputing it from scratch on each request. Despite the name, the cached artifact is not a human-readable copy of the prompt. It is the model state computed while processing that prefix, represented internally as key/value tensors. Reusing the prefix cuts both cost and latency, which is why we work to keep the prompt cache hit-rate high.

Author: Mention here 10x reduction in costs in case we revert the opening paragraph.

> **Tool-definition overhead.** Agents can pull in a high number of tools: those exposed by MCP servers, terminal commands, custom tools, and more. Each tool is sent to the model with a full definition (a name, a description, and a complete JSON parameter schema), and historically every one was loaded into context on every request. Even when that data is cached, the context window overhead is fixed on each turn and grows as the toolset does.

Author: terminal commands are not a good example here. Since it is just one terminal tool. I suggest to use another example of a stupid tool
